README.md, before:

# A Gentle Introduction to Assembly Language Programming

This textbook provides a gentle introduction to assembly language
programming. What makes this introduction "gentle" is that it assumes
the reader is already comfortable with C or C++ coding. We use this
assumed knowledge to **bridge** backward towards the low level ISA
(Instruction Set Architecture).

We drive home a very sharp point:

<center>
   <i>Assembly language is nothing to be scared of!</i>
</center>
</br>

## For Whom Is This Book Intended?

As mentioned, if you are already familiar with C (or languages descended
from C such as C++), this book begins with what you already know. Later
chapters dive more deeply into the corners and recesses of the ARM V8
ISA and are suitable for those wishing to master the rich instruction
set of the 64 bit ARM processors.

## Can This Book Be Used In Courses Covering Assembly Language?

Yes, absolutely.

In fact, we would argue that the study of assembly language is extremely
important to the building of competent software engineers. Further, we
would argue that teaching the x86 instruction set is cruel as that ISA
was born in the 1970s and has simply gotten more muddled with age.

The MIPS instruction set is another ISA that is often covered in College
level courses. While  kinder and gentler than the x86 ISA, the MIPS
processor isn't nearly as relevant as the ARM family. Phones, tablets,
laptops and even desktops contain ARM V8 processors making the study of
the ARM ISA far more topical. Perhaps even more "cool".

## Calling Convention Used In This Book

Assembly language programming is quite closely dependent upon the
underlying hardware architecture. The host operating environment plays
an outsized role in determining how assembly language programs are
constructed. A "calling convention" refers to how functions are called
and how parameters are passed.

In this book we will use the ARM LINUX conventions. This means:

* You will need to run a ARM Linux VM on the Macintosh - even on
  ARM-based Macs. Why? Apple uses a different calling convention.
  The convention used in this book should work on all ARM Linux
  machines while the Apple calling convention is specific to Apple
  Silicon-based machine. In the future, we hope to add a chapter
  offering an explanation of the differences.

* You will need to run WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) on ARM-based
  Windows machines. These do exist!

* You will need to run an ARM Linux VM on x86-based Windows machines.
  This is true even if you are on an ARM-based Windows machine for the
  same reasons indicated above for Apple Silicon. In the future, we
  hope to add a chapter detailing the Windows calling convention.

You'll notice right away that we make use of the C-runtime directly
rather than make OS service calls. So, for instance, if we want to call
`write()`, we call `write` from the assembly language. This version of
the system call `write` is a wrapper function built into the C-runtime
which handles the low level details of performing a system call. See the
[here](./more/system_calls/README.md) on what actually happens inside
these wrapper functions.

## A Lot of Names

As commendable as the ARM designs are, ARM's naming conventions for
their Intellectual Properties are horrid. In this book, AARCH64 and ARM
V8 are taken to be synonyms for the 64 bit ARM Instruction Set
Architecture (ISA).

It is very difficult to find documentation at the ARM site because they
have *so many versions*, so many names for the same thing and so much
documentation in general. It really can be maddening.

Within the text we will provide germane links as appropriate.

[Here](<https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0596/2021-12?lang=en>)
is a link to "a" main instruction set page.

## What you need to work with assembly language on Linux

Getting the tools for assembly language development is quite
straight forward - perhaps you already have them. Using `apt` from
the Linux terminal, say:

```text
sudo apt update
sudo apt install build-essential gdb
```

Then you'll need your favorite editor. We currently use `vi` for quick
edits and Visual Studio Code for any heavy lifting.

## How to build an assembly language

We use `gcc`, the C "compiler". `g++` could also be used. What sense
does that make... using the "compiler" to "compile" assembly language?

Well, to answer that one must understand that the word "compiler" refers
to only one step in a build sequence. What we talk about as being the
"compiler" is actually an umbrella that includes:

* A preprocessor that acts on any `#` preprocessor command like
  `#include`. These commands are not part of C or C++. Rather they
  are commands to the preprocessor.

* The *actual* compiler, whose job it is turn high level languages
  such as C and C++ into assembly language.

* The assembler, which turns assembly language into machine code which
  is not quite ready for execution.

* And finally, the linker, which combines potentially many intermediate
  machine code files (called object files), potentially many library
  files (statically linked .dlls on Windows and .a files on Linux). The
  linker is the last step in this chain.

[Here](https://youtu.be/Iv3psS4n9j8) is a video explaining this process.

We use gcc and g++ directly because, being umbrellas, they automate
the above steps with other benefits such as automatically linking in
the C runtime.

Suppose you've implemented `main()` in a C file (main.c) and want to
call out to an assembly language file you have written (asm.s). It can
be done in several ways.

### All at once

```text
gcc main.c asm.s
```

That's all you need for a minimal build. The resulting program will be
written to `a.out`. All the intermediate files generated will be
removed.

### Modularly

```text
gcc -c main.c
gcc -c asm.s
gcc main.o asm.o
```

Used in this way, `.o` files are left on disk. Using the previous
method, the `.o` files are removed without you seeing them.

### If there are no C or C++ modules used

Suppose `main()` is implemented in assembly language and `main.s` is
self-contained, then simply:

```text
gcc main.s
```

Often, you will want to enable the debugger `gdb`. Do this:

```text
gcc -g main.s
```

### Programs called by the "Compiler"

Using gcc to "compile" a program causes the following to be called
on Ubuntu running on ARM:

```text
/usr/bin/cpp
/usr/lib/gcc/aarch64-linux-gnu/11/cc1
/usr/bin/as
/usr/lib/gcc/aarch64-linux-gnu/11/collect2 which is...
/usr/bin/ld
```

`cpp` is the C preprocessor - it is a general tool can is used by other
languages as well (C++, for example).

`cc1` is the actual compiler.

`as` is the assembler.

`ld` is the linker.

You can see why we default to using the umbrella command in this book.

## Section 1 - Bridging from C / C++ to Assembly Language

We start by providing what we're calling "bridging" from C and C++ to
assembly language. We use the knowledge you already have to learn new
knowledge - how cool is that!

| Chapter | Markdown | PDF |
| ------- | -------- | --- |
| 1 | [Hello World](./section_1/hello_world/README.md) | NA |
| 2 | [If Statements](./section_1/if/README.md) | NA |
| 3 | Loops | |
| .... a | [.... While Loops](./section_1/while/README.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... For Loops](./section_1/for/README.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Implementing Continue](./section_1/for/README.md#implementing-a-continue) | NA |
| .... d | [.... Implementing Break](./section_1/for/README.md#implementing-a-break) | NA |
| 4 | Interludes | |
| .... a | [.... Registers](./section_1/regs/README.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... Load and Store](./section_1/regs/ldr.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... More About `ldr`](./section_1/regs/ldr2.md) | NA |
| .... d | [.... Register Sizes](./section_1/regs/widths.md) | NA |
| 5 | [`switch`](./section_1/jump_tables/README.md) | NA |
| 6 | Functions | |
| .... a | [.... Calling and Returning](./section_1/funcs/README.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... Passing Parameters](./section_1/funcs/README2.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Example of calling some common C runtime functions](./section_1/funcs/README3.md) | NA |
| 7 | [FizzBuzz - a Complete Program](./section_1/fizzbuzz/README.md) | NA |
| 8 | Structs | |
| .... a | [.... Alignment](./section_1/structs/alignment.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... Defining](./section_1/structs/defining.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Using](./section_1/structs/using.md) | NA |
|  9 | [`const`](./section_1/const/README.md) | NA |
|  10 | [Casting](./section_1/casting/README.md) | NA |

## Section 2 - Floating Point

Floating point operations use their own instructions and their own set
of registers. Therefore, floating point operations are covered in their
own section:

| Chapter | Markdown | PDF |
| ------- | -------- | --- |
| 1 | Floating Point | |
| .... a | [.... What Are Floating Point Numbers?](./section_2/float/what.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... Registers (simplified)](./section_2/float/working.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Literals](./section_2/float/literals.md) | NA |
| .... d | [.... `fmov` Not Yet Written](./section_2/float/) | NA |
| .... e | [.... Conversion To / From Integers](./section_2/float/rounding.md) | NA |
| .... f | [.... Four Basic Operations Not Yet Written](./section_2/float/) | NA |
| .... g | [.... Selected Additional Operations Not Yet Written](./section_2/float/) | NA |
| .... z | [.... Half Precision Floats](./section_2/float/half.md) | NA |

## Section 3 - Bit Manipulation

What would a book about assembly language be without bit bashing?

| Chapter | Markdown | PDF |
| ------- | -------- | --- |
| 1 | Bit Fields | |
| .... a | [.... Without Bit Fields](./section_3/bitfields/README.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... With Bit Fields](./section_3/bitfields/with.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Review of Newly Described Instructions](./section_3/bitfields/review.md) | NA |
| 2 | [Endianness](./section_3/endian/README.md) | NA |

## Section 4 - More Stuff

| Chapter | Markdown | PDF |
| ------- | -------- | --- |
| --- | [Determining string literal lengths for C functions](./more/strlen_for_c/README.md) | NA |
| --- | [Under the hood: System Calls](./more/system_calls/README.md) | NA |

## Projects

[Here](./projects/README.md) are some project specifications to offer a
challenge to your growing mastery. Here are very brief descriptions
presented in alphabetical order.

Perhaps before you tackle these, check out the fully described
[FIZZBUZZ](./section_1/fizzbuzz/README.md) program first.

---
The [DIRENT](./projects/DIRENT/README.md) project demonstrates how a
complex `struct` can be used in assembly language.

---
The [PI](./projects/PI/README.md) project demonstrates floating point
instructions. The program will "throw darts at a target," calculating
an approximation of PI by tracking how many darts "hit the target"
versus the total number of darts "thrown".

---
The [SNOW](./projects/snow/README.md) project uses 1970's era tech to
animate a simple particle system. This project demonstrates a reasonable
design process of breaking down complex problems into simpler parts.

---
The [WALKIES](./projects/walkies/README.md) presents a cute little
animation demonstrating looping with some pointer dereferencing.

---

## About The Author

Perry Kivolowitz's career in the Computer Sciences spans just under five
decades. He launched more than 5 companies, mostly relating to hardware,
image processing and visual effects (for motion pictures and
television). Perry received Emmy recognition for his work on the The
Gathering, the pilot episode of Babylon 5. Later he received an Emmy
Award for Engineering along with his colleagues at
[SilhouetteFX, LLC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SilhouetteFX).
SilhouetteFX is used in almost every significant motion picture for
rotoscoping, paint, tracking, 2D to 3D reconstruction, compositing and
more.

In 1996 Perry received an [Academy Award for Scientific and
Technical Achievement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Academy_Award_for_Technical_Achievement)
for his invention of Shape Driven Warping and
Morphing. This is the technique responsible for many of the
famous effects in Forrest Gump, Titanic and Stargate.

Twenty twenty two marks Perry's 18th year teaching Computer
Science at the college level,
ten years at the UW Madison and now 8 at Carthage College.

Assembly language is a passion for Perry having worked in the following
ISAs:

* Univac 1100

* Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-11

* Digital Equipment Corporation VAX-11

* Motorola 68000

* ARM beginning with AARCH64

This work is dedicated to my wife Sara and sons Ian and Evan.

### Gratuitous Plugs

Perry has created a library of about 200 programming projects
suitable for CS 1, CS 2, Data Structures, Networking, Operating
Systems and Computer Organization classes. If a publisher of
CS text books be interested in purchasing the library, please
reach out.

Also, check out [Get Off My L@wn](https://www.amazon.com/Get-Off-My-Zombie-Novel-ebook/dp/B00DQ26J8G), a Zombie novel for
coders. You read that right... elite programmer Doug Handsman retires
to his wife Ruth Ann's native northern Wisconsin. And then, well, the
apocalypse happens. Bummer.

Rated 4.3 out of 5 with more than 70 reviews, it's a fun read and costs
next to nothing.

Commit message:

a great many additions including bridging Apple Silicon

README.md, after:

# A Gentle Introduction to Assembly Language Programming

This textbook provides a gentle introduction to assembly language
programming. What makes this introduction "gentle" is that it assumes
the reader is already comfortable with C or C++ coding. We use this
assumed knowledge to **bridge** backward towards the low level ISA
(Instruction Set Architecture).

We drive home a very sharp point:

<center>
   <i>Assembly language is nothing to be scared of!</i>
</center>
</br>

## For Whom Is This Book Intended?

As mentioned, if you are already familiar with C (or languages descended
from C such as C++), this book begins with what you already know. Later
chapters dive more deeply into the corners and recesses of the ARM V8
ISA and are suitable for those wishing to master the rich instruction
set of the 64 bit ARM processors.

## Can This Book Be Used In Courses Covering Assembly Language?

Yes, absolutely.

In fact, we would argue that the study of assembly language is extremely
important to the building of competent software engineers. Further, we
would argue that teaching the x86 instruction set is cruel as that ISA
was born in the 1970s and has simply gotten more muddled with age.

The MIPS instruction set is another ISA that is often covered in College
level courses. While  kinder and gentler than the x86 ISA, the MIPS
processor isn't nearly as relevant as the ARM family. Phones, tablets,
laptops and even desktops contain ARM V8 processors making the study of
the ARM ISA far more topical. Perhaps even more "cool".

## Calling Convention Used In This Book

Assembly language programming is quite closely dependent upon the
underlying hardware architecture. The host operating environment plays
an outsized role in determining how assembly language programs are
constructed. A "calling convention" refers to how functions are called
and how parameters are passed.

In this book we will use the ARM LINUX conventions. This means:

* You *may** need to run a ARM Linux VM on the Macintosh - even on
  ARM-based Macs. Why? Apple uses a different calling convention.

  The convention used in this book should work on all ARM Linux
  machines while the Apple calling convention is specific to Apple
  Silicon-based machine.

  This necessity did not sit well with some on reddit. We listened.
  
  We now have a chapter devoted to bringing Linux and Apple code
  together to the degree possible. [This chapter](./more/apple_silicon/)
  also provides a suite of macros that provide this help.

* You will need to run WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux) on ARM-based
  Windows machines. These do exist!

* You will need to run an ARM Linux VM on x86-based Windows machines.
  This is true even if you are on an ARM-based Windows machine for the
  same reasons indicated above for Apple Silicon. In the future, we
  hope to add a chapter detailing the Windows calling convention.

You'll notice right away that we make use of the C-runtime directly
rather than make OS service calls. So, for instance, if we want to call
`write()`, we call `write` from the assembly language. This version of
the system call `write` is a wrapper function built into the C-runtime
which handles the low level details of performing a system call. See the
[here](./more/system_calls/README.md) on what actually happens inside
these wrapper functions.

## A Lot of Names

As commendable as the ARM designs are, ARM's naming conventions for
their Intellectual Properties are horrid. In this book, AARCH64 and ARM
V8 are taken to be synonyms for the 64 bit ARM Instruction Set
Architecture (ISA).

It is very difficult to find documentation at the ARM site because they
have *so many versions*, so many names for the same thing and so much
documentation in general. It really can be maddening.

Within the text we will provide germane links as appropriate.

[Here](<https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0596/2021-12?lang=en>)
is a link to "a" main instruction set page.

## What you need to work with assembly language on Linux

Getting the tools for assembly language development is quite
straight forward - perhaps you already have them. Using `apt` from
the Linux terminal, say:

```text
sudo apt update
sudo apt install build-essential gdb
```

Then you'll need your favorite editor. We currently use `vi` for quick
edits and Visual Studio Code for any heavy lifting.

## How to build an assembly language

We use `gcc`, the C "compiler". `g++` could also be used. What sense
does that make... using the "compiler" to "compile" assembly language?

Well, to answer that one must understand that the word "compiler" refers
to only one step in a build sequence. What we talk about as being the
"compiler" is actually an umbrella that includes:

* A preprocessor that acts on any `#` preprocessor command like
  `#include`. These commands are not part of C or C++. Rather they
  are commands to the preprocessor.

* The *actual* compiler, whose job it is turn high level languages
  such as C and C++ into assembly language.

* The assembler, which turns assembly language into machine code which
  is not quite ready for execution.

* And finally, the linker, which combines potentially many intermediate
  machine code files (called object files), potentially many library
  files (statically linked .dlls on Windows and .a files on Linux). The
  linker is the last step in this chain.

[Here](https://youtu.be/Iv3psS4n9j8) is a video explaining this process.

We use gcc and g++ directly because, being umbrellas, they automate
the above steps with other benefits such as automatically linking in
the C runtime.

Suppose you've implemented `main()` in a C file (main.c) and want to
call out to an assembly language file you have written (asm.s). It can
be done in several ways.

### All at once

```text
gcc main.c asm.s
```

That's all you need for a minimal build. The resulting program will be
written to `a.out`. All the intermediate files generated will be
removed.

### Modularly

```text
gcc -c main.c
gcc -c asm.s
gcc main.o asm.o
```

Used in this way, `.o` files are left on disk. Using the previous
method, the `.o` files are removed without you seeing them.

### If there are no C or C++ modules used

Suppose `main()` is implemented in assembly language and `main.s` is
self-contained, then simply:

```text
gcc main.s
```

Often, you will want to enable the debugger `gdb`. Do this:

```text
gcc -g main.s
```

### Programs called by the "Compiler"

Using gcc to "compile" a program causes the following to be called
on Ubuntu running on ARM:

```text
/usr/bin/cpp
/usr/lib/gcc/aarch64-linux-gnu/11/cc1
/usr/bin/as
/usr/lib/gcc/aarch64-linux-gnu/11/collect2 which is...
/usr/bin/ld
```

`cpp` is the C preprocessor - it is a general tool can is used by other
languages as well (C++, for example).

`cc1` is the actual compiler.

`as` is the assembler.

`ld` is the linker.

You can see why we default to using the umbrella command in this book.

## Section 1 - Bridging from C / C++ to Assembly Language

We start by providing what we're calling "bridging" from C and C++ to
assembly language. We use the knowledge you already have to learn new
knowledge - how cool is that!

| Chapter | Markdown | PDF |
| ------- | -------- | --- |
| 1 | [Hello World](./section_1/hello_world/README.md) | NA |
| 2 | [If Statements](./section_1/if/README.md) | NA |
| 3 | Loops | |
| .... a | [.... While Loops](./section_1/while/README.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... For Loops](./section_1/for/README.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Implementing Continue](./section_1/for/README.md#implementing-a-continue) | NA |
| .... d | [.... Implementing Break](./section_1/for/README.md#implementing-a-break) | NA |
| 4 | Interludes | |
| .... a | [.... Registers](./section_1/regs/README.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... Load and Store](./section_1/regs/ldr.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... More About `ldr`](./section_1/regs/ldr2.md) | NA |
| .... d | [.... Register Sizes](./section_1/regs/widths.md) | NA |
| 5 | [`switch`](./section_1/jump_tables/README.md) | NA |
| 6 | Functions | |
| .... a | [.... Calling and Returning](./section_1/funcs/README.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... Passing Parameters](./section_1/funcs/README2.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Example of calling some common C runtime functions](./section_1/funcs/README3.md) | NA |
| 7 | [FizzBuzz - a Complete Program](./section_1/fizzbuzz/README.md) | NA |
| 8 | Structs | |
| .... a | [.... Alignment](./section_1/structs/alignment.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... Defining](./section_1/structs/defining.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Using](./section_1/structs/using.md) | NA |
|  9 | [`const`](./section_1/const/README.md) | NA |
|  10 | [Casting](./section_1/casting/README.md) | NA |

## Section 2 - Floating Point

Floating point operations use their own instructions and their own set
of registers. Therefore, floating point operations are covered in their
own section:

| Chapter | Markdown | PDF |
| ------- | -------- | --- |
| 1 | Floating Point | |
| .... a | [.... What Are Floating Point Numbers?](./section_2/float/what.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... Registers (simplified)](./section_2/float/working.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Literals](./section_2/float/literals.md) | NA |
| .... d | [.... `fmov` Not Yet Written](./section_2/float/) | NA |
| .... e | [.... Conversion To / From Integers](./section_2/float/rounding.md) | NA |
| .... f | [.... Four Basic Operations Not Yet Written](./section_2/float/) | NA |
| .... g | [.... Selected Additional Operations Not Yet Written](./section_2/float/) | NA |
| .... z | [.... Half Precision Floats](./section_2/float/half.md) | NA |

## Section 3 - Bit Manipulation

What would a book about assembly language be without bit bashing?

| Chapter | Markdown | PDF |
| ------- | -------- | --- |
| 1 | Bit Fields | |
| .... a | [.... Without Bit Fields](./section_3/bitfields/README.md) | NA |
| .... b | [.... With Bit Fields](./section_3/bitfields/with.md) | NA |
| .... c | [.... Review of Newly Described Instructions](./section_3/bitfields/review.md) | NA |
| 2 | [Endianness](./section_3/endian/README.md) | NA |

## Section 4 - More Stuff

| Chapter | Markdown | PDF |
| ------- | -------- | --- |
| --- | [Determining string literal lengths for C functions](./more/strlen_for_c/README.md) | NA |
| --- | [Under the hood: System Calls](./more/system_calls/README.md) | NA |

## Projects

[Here](./projects/README.md) are some project specifications to offer a
challenge to your growing mastery. Here are very brief descriptions
presented in alphabetical order.

Perhaps before you tackle these, check out the fully described
[FIZZBUZZ](./section_1/fizzbuzz/README.md) program first.

---
The [DIRENT](./projects/DIRENT/README.md) project demonstrates how a
complex `struct` can be used in assembly language.

---
The [PI](./projects/PI/README.md) project demonstrates floating point
instructions. The program will "throw darts at a target," calculating
an approximation of PI by tracking how many darts "hit the target"
versus the total number of darts "thrown".

---
The [SNOW](./projects/snow/README.md) project uses 1970's era tech to
animate a simple particle system. This project demonstrates a reasonable
design process of breaking down complex problems into simpler parts.

---
The [WALKIES](./projects/walkies/README.md) presents a cute little
animation demonstrating looping with some pointer dereferencing.

---

## About The Author

Perry Kivolowitz's career in the Computer Sciences spans just under five
decades. He launched more than 5 companies, mostly relating to hardware,
image processing and visual effects (for motion pictures and
television). Perry received Emmy recognition for his work on the The
Gathering, the pilot episode of Babylon 5. Later he received an Emmy
Award for Engineering along with his colleagues at
[SilhouetteFX, LLC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SilhouetteFX).
SilhouetteFX is used in almost every significant motion picture for
rotoscoping, paint, tracking, 2D to 3D reconstruction, compositing and
more.

In 1996 Perry received an [Academy Award for Scientific and
Technical Achievement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Academy_Award_for_Technical_Achievement)
for his invention of Shape Driven Warping and
Morphing. This is the technique responsible for many of the
famous effects in Forrest Gump, Titanic and Stargate.

Twenty twenty two marks Perry's 18th year teaching Computer
Science at the college level,
ten years at the UW Madison and now 8 at Carthage College.

Assembly language is a passion for Perry having worked in the following
ISAs:

* Univac 1100

* Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-11

* Digital Equipment Corporation VAX-11

* Motorola 68000

* ARM beginning with AARCH64

This work is dedicated to my wife Sara and sons Ian and Evan.

### Gratuitous Plugs

Perry has created a library of about 200 programming projects
suitable for CS 1, CS 2, Data Structures, Networking, Operating
Systems and Computer Organization classes. If a publisher of
CS text books be interested in purchasing the library, please
reach out.

Also, check out [Get Off My L@wn](https://www.amazon.com/Get-Off-My-Zombie-Novel-ebook/dp/B00DQ26J8G), a Zombie novel for
coders. You read that right... elite programmer Doug Handsman retires
to his wife Ruth Ann's native northern Wisconsin. And then, well, the
apocalypse happens. Bummer.

Rated 4.3 out of 5 with more than 70 reviews, it's a fun read and costs
next to nothing.
