more/apple_silicon/README.md, before:

# Apple Silicon

This book is written to the Linux calling convention as stated early on.
Unfortunately, this means that even if you own an Apple Silicon machine,
which is AARCH64, you'd still need a Linux virtual machine. 

This didn't sit well with some on reddit and rightfully so. We undertook
to develop a way of writing assembly code once and having it work on
both Mac OS and Linux to the degree possible.

[Much of this chapter has been replaced here](./../../macros/).

There are some things we cannot adapt, such as variadic functions (e.g.
`printf()`) but we explain how code can be written to be compatible with
both environments at the expense of some minor amount duplicated code.

## Assembly language macros

An early innovation in assemblers was the introduction of a macro
capability. Given what could be considered a certain amount of tedium in
coding in asm, macros provide a simple form of *meta programming* where
a series of statements can be encapsulated by a single macro. Think of a
macro as an early form of C++ templated function (kinda but not really).

Here's an example of an assembly language macro:

```text
.macro LLD_ADDR xreg, label 
        adrp    \xreg, \label@PAGE
        add     \xreg, \xreg, \label@PAGEOFF
.endm
```

Here's how it might be used:

```text
        LLD_ADDR x0, fmt
```

This gets expanded to:

```text
        adrp    x0, fmt@PAGE
        add     x0, x0, fmt@PAGEOFF
```

## Reminder - there is documentation for these macros

The documentation for the macro suite has been moved
[here](./../../macros/).

## How to force the C pre-processor to run on assembly language

`clang` on Mac OS will run assembly language files through the
C pre-processor. `clang` on Linux will not by default but can if you
specify `-x assembler-with-cpp`.

`gcc` on Mac OS can be based on `clang` so on Mac OS it inherits
`clang`'s behavior. `gcc` on Linux does not run assembly language files
through the C pre-processor *if the asm file ends in .s but WILL if the
file ends in .S*

## Differences between Apple and Linux

## Variadic functions

*This is important! Understand this section in order to be able to use
`printf()`.*

Functions like `printf()` are variadic. These are functions that can
take any number of parameters. The first argument contains information
that tells the function how many parameters were actually given.

For example:

`printf("%d is a number.\n", 9);`

There is but one `%` place holder in this text. This tells `printf()`
that in addition to the string there is but one more parameter to be
expected.

Apple and Linux handle variadic differently.

Linux will use the scratch registers first up to the integer or floating
point register 7. *Then* it will use the stack.

Apple will put the first parameter in the zero register and then shifts
immediately to putting all other parameters onto the stack.

We overcome this difference by detecting which environment we are
building in using `#if` after having first set up for the Linux version.

By setting up for the Linux version, the Apple version involves just
pushing registers onto the stack.

Remember that `%f` **always** expects a double. This is hidden from you
in C and C++ but is important in assembly language. Use `fcvt` to shift
from single precision to double.

An example:

```text
        LLD_ADDR    x0, fmt
        LLD_FLT     x1, s0, flt
        fcvt        d0, s0
#if defined(__APPLE__)
        PUSH_R      d0
        CRT         printf
        add         sp, sp, 16
#else
        CRT         printf
#endif
```

## Other differences

### Frame pointer

Apple requires that `x29` be kept as a valid stack frame pointer. The
frame pointer should always start out as equal to the stack pointer.
However, within the function, the stack pointer is free to change. The
frame pointer must remain fixed so that debuggers always know how to 
find the initial stack *frame*.

To be Apple compatible, in addition to backing up `x30` also back up
`x29` and then:

`mov x29, sp`

We will be converting all sample code to do this over time.

### More?

As we discover more differences, they will be described here.

## START_PROC and END_PROC

Again, for debugging purposes, you can insert frame checks into your
code. These work the same on both Apple Silicon and Linux. If you want
these, put `START_PROC` after the label introducing a function. Then,
put `END_PROC` after the last statement of the function.

This helps the debuggers understand where a function begins and ends.

We will transition all sample code to use this over time.

## A useful link

[Here](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Invoking-GCC.html) is an
understandable version of gcc documentation.

Commit message:

fixed up some file references and added text about adding to the stack pointer rather than popping

more/apple_silicon/README.md, after:

# Apple Silicon

This book is written to the Linux calling convention as stated early on.
Unfortunately, this means that even if you own an Apple Silicon machine,
which is AARCH64, you'd still need a Linux virtual machine. 

This didn't sit well with some on reddit and rightfully so. We undertook
to develop a way of writing assembly code once and having it work on
both Mac OS and Linux to the degree possible.

[Much of this chapter has been replaced here](./../../macros/).

There are some things we cannot adapt, such as variadic functions (e.g.
`printf()`) but we explain how code can be written to be compatible with
both environments at the expense of some minor amount duplicated code.

## Assembly language macros

An early innovation in assemblers was the introduction of a macro
capability. Given what could be considered a certain amount of tedium in
coding in asm, macros provide a simple form of *meta programming* where
a series of statements can be encapsulated by a single macro. Think of a
macro as an early form of C++ templated function (kinda but not really).

Here's an example of an assembly language macro:

```text
.macro LLD_ADDR xreg, label 
        adrp    \xreg, \label@PAGE
        add     \xreg, \xreg, \label@PAGEOFF
.endm
```

Here's how it might be used:

```text
        LLD_ADDR x0, fmt
```

This gets expanded to:

```text
        adrp    x0, fmt@PAGE
        add     x0, x0, fmt@PAGEOFF
```

## Reminder - there is documentation for these macros

The documentation for the macro suite has been moved
[here](./../../macros/).

## How to force the C pre-processor to run on assembly language

`clang` on Mac OS will run assembly language files through the
C pre-processor. `clang` on Linux will not by default but can if you
specify `-x assembler-with-cpp`.

`gcc` on Mac OS can be based on `clang` so on Mac OS it inherits
`clang`'s behavior. `gcc` on Linux does not run assembly language files
through the C pre-processor *if the asm file ends in .s but WILL if the
file ends in .S*

## Differences between Apple and Linux

### Variadic functions

*This is important! Understand this section in order to be able to use
`printf()`.*

Functions like `printf()` are variadic. These are functions that can
take any number of parameters. The first argument contains information
that tells the function how many parameters were actually given.

For example:

`printf("%d is a number.\n", 9);`

There is but one `%` place holder in this text. This tells `printf()`
that in addition to the string there is but one more parameter to be
expected.

Apple and Linux handle variadic differently.

Linux will use the scratch registers first up to the integer or floating
point register 7. *Then* it will use the stack.

Apple will put the first parameter in the zero register and then shifts
immediately to putting all other parameters onto the stack.

We overcome this difference by detecting which environment we are
building in using `#if` after having first set up for the Linux version.

By setting up for the Linux version, the Apple version involves just
pushing registers onto the stack.

Remember that `%f` **always** expects a double. This is hidden from you
in C and C++ but is important in assembly language. Use `fcvt` to shift
from single precision to double.

An example:

```text
        LLD_ADDR    x0, fmt
        LLD_FLT     x1, s0, flt
        fcvt        d0, s0
#if defined(__APPLE__)
        PUSH_R      d0
        CRT         printf
        add         sp, sp, 16  // See discussion below.
#else
        CRT         printf
#endif
```

Reminder that this makes use of the C preprocessor to perform the
conditional evaluation detecting the platform. You can ensure that the C
preprocessor is used by naming your assembly language source code files
ending in capital S.

### Undoing Stack Pointer Changes

A small tip concerning undoing changes to the stack pointer. You might
think that changes to the stack made by `str` or `stp` and their
cousins **must** be undone with `ldr` or `ldp` and their cousins.

This depends.

If you need to get back the original contents of a register pushed onto
the stack, then an `ldr` or `ldp` is appropriate. However, if you don't
need to get the original contents of a register back, then it is faster
to undo a change to the stack using addition.

Take for example the use of `printf()`. On Apple Silicon systems, you
must send arguments to `printf()` by pushing them onto the stack.
However, when `printf()` completes, you have no need for the values that
you pushed. As shown above, simply add the right (multiple of 16) to the
stack pointer. This is faster as the addition makes no reference to RAM
(or caches) as the `ldr` would.

### Frame pointer

Apple requires that `x29` be kept as a valid stack frame pointer. The
frame pointer should always start out as equal to the stack pointer.
However, within the function, the stack pointer is free to change. The
frame pointer must remain fixed so that debuggers always know how to 
find the initial stack *frame*.

To be Apple compatible, in addition to backing up `x30` also back up
`x29` and then:

`mov x29, sp`

We will be converting all sample code to do this over time.

### More?

As we discover more differences, they will be described here.

## START_PROC and END_PROC

Again, for debugging purposes, you can insert frame checks into your
code. These work the same on both Apple Silicon and Linux. If you want
these, put `START_PROC` after the label introducing a function. Then,
put `END_PROC` after the last statement of the function.

This helps the debuggers understand where a function begins and ends.

We will transition all sample code to use this over time.

## A useful link

[Here](https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/Invoking-GCC.html) is an
understandable version of gcc documentation.
